President Biden
is again
applying pressure on Israel over
its actions in Gaza.
The president spoke with Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu over the weekend.
The White House
said Biden made it clear that the U.S.
would not support
a potential invasion of Rafah
without an explicit plan
to protect civilians.
But a source says
the primary focus of the call
was a potential hostage deal with Hamas.
It comes after the group
released a video of two hostages
on Saturday on the left as Israeli
Omri Moran.
On the right is American
Israeli Keith Segal.
In the video,
Segal pleaded for Israel
to negotiate a hostage release deal
that appeared
he he was speaking under some duress.
CNN cannot verify
where or when the video was shot.
Meanwhile,
the secretary of state is in Saudi
Arabia right now.
As Hamas is considering a new deal
calling for the release of hostages
held since October 7th in exchange
for a pause in the fighting in Gaza.
This morning,
Tony Blinken said
Israel has presented
Hamas with, quote, an extraordinarily
generous proposal,
adding that the militant group
is the only thing
standing between the people of Gaza
and a cease fire.
Let's get the latest
from CNN national security
correspondent Kylie Atwood.
Kylie over at the State Department
for us. Kylie.
What can you tell us about this proposal?
Well, listen, as you said,
the secretary of state
very clearly this morning
saying that in the U.S.
opinion, what has been put on the table
by Israel for
Hamas is an extraordinarily,
quote, generous proposal.
And he called on Hamas to
accept that deal.
He also said that they have to accept it
quickly.
And our reporting
is that some of the demands
that Israel had been
making has been lessened.
And so
it appears that this could be a proposal
that Hamas could accept.
And the reason for him
saying that Hamas has to act quickly
is because the backdrop here is that
Israel has been saying for some time
they plan to invade Rafah. And U.S.
officials are very eyes wide open
about the fact that they are likely
to go ahead with that invasion
if there isn't an agreement here
for a cease fire
and for hostages to be released.
So time is truly of the essence.
Yeah.
And clearly, a
source tells CNN
that there's a worry
inside the State Department
that Israel is not using
American provided weapons
in accordance with international law.
What's going on there?
Yeah.
So there is not a consensus opinion
within the State Department as to
if Israel is using
those american-made weapons in accordance
with international law.
That's according to a State Department
official who spoke with my colleague,
Jennifer Handler.
And this is important
because this is all going to
come to the fore next week.
There is a requirement
due to a new national security memorandum
that President Biden signed
at the end of last year
for the State Department,
for the secretary
to provide an actual assessment
as to with all of the countries
using american-made weaponry are doing so
in accordance with international law.
These countries are supposed
to provide their rationale,
their explanation
for the fact that they do believe
they are in accordance
with international law.
The State Department assesses
that, provide that to Congress.
But because there is disagreement
within the State Department over this
right now,
it's going to be interesting
to see
what the final determination
from the secretary of state
actually is next week
when he provides
that assessment to Congress Jim.
All right.
Very important development there.
Kylie Atwood, thank you very much.
U.S.
Secretary of state
is back in the Middle East
for the seventh time
since the start of the Israel-Hamas war
and is urging Hamas
to accept the latest framework
for a Gaza cease fire.
Anthony Blinken meeting today
with regional foreign ministers
and other top diplomats
at a special forum,
a special World Economic
Forum meeting, rather, in Riyadh.
It comes as a Hamas delegation in Cairo
is there to discuss the new proposal
for a truce,
which calls
for the release of Israeli hostages
and Palestinian prisoners.
Over the span of several weeks
in exchange
for a temporary cease fire
and the restoration of sustainable calm.
I want to play for you a little bit more
from that meeting with the Saudi
foreign minister was asked
specifically about the situation
in Gaza and Saudi Arabia's role.
Take a listen.
The situation in Gaza
obviously is a catastrophe by every major
humanitarian, but also a complete failing
of the existing political system
to deal with that crisis.
We in the region are not going
to focus only on
solving the crisis of the moment.
We are going to look at how we can solve
the bigger problem
in the context of Gaza.
That is
a real commitment
to a two-State solution.
That is a credible, irreversible
path to a Palestinian state.
That's the only reasonable
and credible
solution
that guarantees us
from not having to come back
to this same situation,
to three, four years down the line.
The shadow minister of state
for foreign affairs
also pointing
to reduced conflict in the region.
Take a listen.
Our objective is to link the region with
the world and to be able to
put the
resources of the region together
so we can create synergies
that have a positive impact
on all the inhabitants of the region.
This is complicated
by the tensions
that we have in the region.
So our objective is to try to put an end
to these tensions
so we can focus on the things
that matter.
Economic development and prosperity.
The crisis in Gaza, understandably
top of mind at the World
Economic Forum conference.
That is where my colleague Becky Anderson
sat down with the forum's president.
They began by speaking about
the future of the enclave
and what will be needed to help rebuild.
There will be no willingness
among any donors to rebuild Gaza
if there's no guarantee
that there will not be a Gaza war again,
because we will rebuild something
that will be bombed again.
That means an irreversible
path to a Palestinian state.
From the conversations
that you are having here
and these are around
that a unified Arab strategy
for Gaza and Palestinians going forward,
is your sense that we are close?
I think
with the cease fire in Gaza, at least
there will be a willingness
to have real political discussions.
What is in it for Israel is,
of course, a potential deal
with, for example, Saudi Arabia and Saudi
Arabia will then gain
additional support
from the US on the military side.
But we know that this has taken time
also before.
And I guess there is also
the complications with
the political situation in Israel.
Is there a willingness
to work for a two-State solution?
And then we have the American elections
coming up too,
that some people say
that is not possible to move
before or after those elections
because a plan, though, I think
has to also be supported
very strongly from outside.
You will have to have the Arab countries
and the US and other key players saying
this is the deal Take it or leave it.
Important points, of
course,
as in terms of the economic picture
for the region.
It is not defined,
of course, by conflict.
It's incredibly complex.
The host of the World
Economic Economic Forum
is a case in point.
Here's more about Saudi
Arabia's current trajectory.
So it is very significant that Saudi
Arabia have reached already
this big milestone
of 50% of the economy is now based on
oil and gas.
This was the plan for 2030
that the conference launched
and now we are in 2024.
So this is incredible.
But we also see other these days
doing really well
also with their investments knowing
they have a lot of talent there.
Qatar
but then the Middle East is kind of.
There is the JCC
and then there are other Middle
Eastern countries
that are really really struggling.
I'm assuming
that you will look at a country
like the kingdom and say here's
a great example of how
that kind of
portfolio comes together
successfully again.
How how does one take
what is going on here
and around this region
as a starter for ten as it were?
When you're looking at the wider world.
So Saudi
Arabia is going by thing investments.
That's important.
We're seeing people
also expats coming
to the kingdom and they also have an open
trade policy.
They're reducing tariffs
and they're not
sticking to protectionism.
The challenge globally is
that trade
was the engine of growth for decades.
So trade was growing much faster
than the global economy.
Now trade is growing slower.
Then
that is also leading
to more anemic growth
of what we have to avoid
is that the twenties become the 1970s.
So how do you avoid the twenties
becoming the 1970s like this?
It's also important
to look at some of the success stories
of these past decades.
So we are faced with that.
Globalization
is a different globalization.
I think on the global trends,
we will not only have a situation
where you stick
to comparative advantages,
you will have nurturing
particles or French roaring that you
then trade more with countries
where you feel that you are great.
But it's also very
important that you don't lose the baby
with the bathwater
because this globalization has led
to a situation where never seen
so much poverty being eradicated.
In 1994, 2% of the global population
lived in extreme poverty.
Today it's 10%
and we'll continue to watch
for more developments out of Riyadh.